    Observation and mitigation of RF-plasma-induced damage to
    III-nitrides grown by molecular beam epitaxy

      Evan A. Clinton1, Ehsan Vadiee1, M. Brooks Tellekamp2, and W. Alan Doolittle1,a)
      1School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
      Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
      2National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA

      a)Alan.Doolittle@ece.gatech.edu

      Abstract ­ In this work, radio-frequency (RF) plasma-induced damage to III-nitrides
      surfaces and bulk defects are observed, and mitigated. It is shown that for InN films, the
      surface is more sensitive to plasma-induced damage than GaN films, as observed via
      atomic force microscopy (AFM) and reflection high energy electron diffraction (RHEED).
      In order to isolate any possible plasma-induced damage, a growth window for InN is
      established, and temperature ranges are determined for other damaging effects which
      include: roughening due to low adatom mobility, InN decomposition, and indium
      desorption. In-situ plasma monitoring and optimization are accomplished with a
      combination of optical emission spectroscopy (OES) as well as a remote Langmuir
      probe. It is shown that by increasing the plasma nitrogen flow, the positive ion content
      increases; however, the ion acceleration potential reduces. Additionally, a reduced RF
      plasma power results in a reduction of atomic nitrogen species. These plasma species
      and energetic variations result in variations in the bulk unintentional background
      electron concentrations observed by room temperature Hall Effect measurements of ~1
      µm thick InN films. By increasing the nitrogen flow from 2.5 to 7.5 sccm for a constant
      RF power of 350 W, the background electron concentration decreases by 74% from
      1.36 x 1019 cm-3 to 3.54 x 1018 cm-3, while maintaining a smooth surface morphology.
      Additionally, photoluminescence spectra indicate optical emission energies shift from
      ~0.81 to 0.71 eV (closer to the fundamental bandgap of InN) by limiting the damaging
      plasma species. Finally, conditions are presented to further minimize plasma-induced
      damage in III-nitride devices.

                                                                1

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      I. INTRODUCTION

               The III-nitrides demonstrate a band gap as low as ~0.7 eV for InN1, a high light
      absorption coefficient2, and a high radiation resistance3 which are all desirable for a
      variety of optoelectronic devices such as light emitting diodes (LEDs) and solar cells.

               III-nitride devices are commercially available, such as blue LEDs due to the low
      indium content used in the InxGa1-xN/GaN quantum well active layers (x < 0.15),
      resulting in a low lattice-mismatch between the InxGa1-xN quantum well and GaN barrier
      and high electron-hole wave function overlap. Increasing the indium content in both the
      quantum wells and barriers can enable longer wavelength emission while minimizing
      the generation of additional lattice-mismatch induced defects in the active layer. Thus,
      high indium content InxGa1-xN with low defect densities, and single-phase crystallinity
      are essential to realize the next generation of long wavelength III-nitride multi-quantum
      well (MQW) LEDs.

               In addition to LEDs, III-nitride solar cells have been demonstrated with active
      layers consisting of either InxGa1-xN/GaN MQWs4­6 or single semi-bulk InxGa1-xN.7,8 In
      order to optimally design single junction and tandem InxGa1-xN solar cells for optimal
      utilization of the solar spectrum, InxGa1-xN absorbing layers with x > 0.5 is required.9
      Presently, InxGa1-xN solar cells are limited in photovoltaic performance with efficiencies
      less than 4%10 primarily due to the limited indium content, and the poor crystal quality of
      the active layer and, thus, low carrier extraction efficiency. Therefore, improving the
      crystal quality of high indium content III-nitrides is essential for next generation LEDs,
      solar cells, and other optoelectronic devices.

               III-nitride molecular beam epitaxy typically uses one of two nitrogen sources. In
      one form, ammonia is supplied to the growth surface and thermally "cracked" to provide
      active nitrogen to the crystal. Achieving high quality films via ammonia-based MBE
      becomes significantly more challenging at low growth temperatures due to the inefficient
      cracking of nitrogen.11 The high growth temperatures in ammonia-based MBE required
      to growth high quality nitride-based films is not suitable for the growth of high indium
      content InxGa1-xN films. However, plasma-assisted molecular beam epitaxy (PAMBE)
      which utilizes a radio frequency (RF) plasma source to dissociate gaseous molecular
      nitrogen can be extended to colder substrate temperatures as low as 275 °C for InN12
      and is thus capable of growing single phase InxGa1-xN for all x from 0  x  1.13­15

               For III-nitride films, as the indium content increases, the band gap decreases,
      and, thus, the bond strength decreases. As the bond strength decreases, the film
      becomes more susceptible to plasma-induced damage. Crystal damage during the
      growth arises from impinging high kinetic energy particles which, in turn, result in
      enhanced decomposition, desorption of adatoms, and an increase in surface dangling
      bonds. The mentioned drawbacks can detrimentally reduce the surface diffusion length
      and may even prevent step-flow growth. Given the PAMBE nitrogen sources are remote
      sources with low energy ions, typically less than 6 eV of kinetic energy filtering out
      through a series of orifices, any detected ion damage would likely be worsened in direct
      plasma deposition techniques with high ion energies such as sputtering. Therefore, in

                                                                2

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      order to optimize III-nitride film quality and realize the next generation of optoelectronic
      devices, damage from the plasma discharge must be characterized and minimized.

               In a PAMBE reactor, typically the plasma chamber is a pyrolytic boron nitride
      chamber in series with the nitrogen gas source and the growth chamber. The plasma
      chamber is excited by an RF electromagnetic source able to energetically excite (< ~9
      eV) and even crack (> 9.7 eV) molecules of nitrogen producing various populations of
      excited atomic and molecular nitrogen along with both positive and negative ions and
      free electrons. When nitrogen flows through the plasma chamber, a conductance
      limitation enabled by an aperture plate at the plasma chamber outlet results in
      pressures in the order of millitorr. The RF energy excited gas leaks out into the growth
      chamber which is operated in the 10-5-10-6 Torr pressure range. Along with the excited
      neutral charged gas emission through the aperture plate, both electrons and ions
      escape and all species are directed in a molecular beam (essentially collisionless)
      toward the substrate. Since the vacuum acts as a dielectric capacitance and the
      substrate is typically grounded to the chamber potential, the relative differences in the
      positive to negative species (positive ions, negative ions, and electrons) emission rates
      induce a net "floating potential" in steady state between the chamber/substrate and the
      plasma itself. Direct bombardment of ions from inside the plasma to the substrate is
      limited by the aperture plate containing narrow holes, and so the primary source of
      acceleration energy for any ions towards the substrate is from the floating potential. The
      nature of the plasma discharge is determined primarily from the plasma bulb geometry,
      the size of each hole and conductance of the collection of holes in the aperture plate,
      the input nitrogen gas flow, and the applied plasma power.16 Specifically, the plasma
      pressure in the bulb is determined by the flow rate and the conductance of the aperture
      determines the mean free path for plasma collisions, and in large part, the acceleration
      potential. The geometry of the plasma bulb as well as the number of holes in the
      aperture plate modify the bulb volume and conductance.17 A wide range of applied
      plasma powers and nitrogen gas flows are used to study the optical and electrical
      characteristics of the plasma discharge and the crystal quality of the grown films.

               The plasma discharge can be electrically characterized in-situ via a Langmuir
      probe.18,19 The current-voltage characteristics of the Langmuir probe can reveal the
      positive and negative ion contents and the ion acceleration potential, which is the
      voltage induced between the plasma and the substrate. Reducing the ion content, and
      minimizing the ion acceleration potential has been demonstrated to improve III-nitride
      film quality.20

               The optical behavior of the plasma can be characterized via optical emission
      spectroscopy (OES) through the rear plasma window port. OES provides a qualitative
      understanding of the molecular and atomic nitrogen species in the plasma. It is shown
      that the ratio of the molecular and atomic nitrogen species in the plasma changes by
      varying the input nitrogen flow and applied plasma power.21 The optical characteristics
      of the plasma measured by OES are weighted by the transmission properties of the rear
      plasma window and the PBN bulb.

                                                                3

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
               OES measures both excited molecular and atomic nitrogen species, but cannot
      distinguish between ionic and neutral excited species. In contrast, a Langmuir probe
      can measure the charged particles in the form of ions and electrons, but cannot
      distinguish between molecular and atomic ions. Plasma characterization is best
      performed when combining these two techniques while recognizing their individual
      limitations.

               In this work, InN, possessing the weakest molecular bond strength (7.72 eV/bond
      in the bulk) of the III-nitrides (compared to 9.12 and 11.52 eV/bond of GaN and AlN, in
      the bulk, respectively), is utilized as a sensitive material to characterize and optimize the
      plasma discharge.22 It is important to note that the surface bond energies may be
      significantly less than those of the bulk due to local near-surface crystalline softening
      and chemical catalytic energy additions. Thus, the plasma-induced damage in InN films
      needs to be isolated from other potentially damaging effects which can also generate
      defects in the film. These effects primarily include roughening due to low adatom
      mobility, InN decomposition, and indium desorption.

               The Langmuir probe, OES, and InN crystal quality data are combined to provide
      insight and guidance towards optimal plasma conditions which minimize plasma
      damage of high indium content III-nitrides films.

      II. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE

               In this study, a Riber 32 PAMBE reactor is employed to study the nitrogen
      plasma discharge and grow nitride-based films. GaN templates on sapphire were
      chosen as substrates. The templates were first backside metallized with 2 µm of
      tantalum to ensure temperature uniformity during the growth. Next, the templates were
      cleaned with a two-stage piranha clean consisting of 3:1 of H2SO4:H2O2 followed by a DI
      water rinse. The substrates were then loaded into an introductory chamber and
      outgassed at 200 °C before loading into the growth reactor. Inside the growth reactor,
      indium and gallium fluxes are supplied via a standard effusion cell and a Veeco dual-
      filament SUMO cell, respectively. A Veeco UNI-Bulb RF nitrogen plasma source was
      used to supply various nitrogen flows and powers ranging from 2.5 to 12.5 sccm and
      350 to 550 W, respectively. The plasma source was equipped with an aperture plate
      containing ~2000 holes drilled with a #80 drill bit (0.0135" diameter). This is roughly half
      the total conductance used in our previous work that resulted in GaN growth rates of 9.8
      um/hour17. The plasma optical emission spectrum was monitored in-situ via an Ocean
      Optics HR-2000+ES spectrometer through both a rear window and the pyrolytic boron
      nitride (PBN) bulb. The flux gauge collector terminal is repurposed as a Langmuir probe
      and placed in a position that matches the film growth position, in order to accurately
      characterize the plasma in the growth environment. A Keithley 6517A electrometer is
      connected to the collector pin feedthrough to sweep the voltage between -100 and 100
      V and sense current. Growths were achieved by utilizing the metal modulated epitaxy
      (MME) growth technique, presented in our previous works.12,23 Reflection high energy
      electron diffraction (RHEED) was used to monitor the MME growths in-situ.

                                                                4

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
               The sensitivity of nitride-based surfaces to the plasma discharge is first studied

      by comparing the surface quality of GaN and InN films which were exposed to the
      plasma discharge post-growth with a nitrogen plasma input flow of 2.5 sccm and an
      applied RF power of 350 W. Figure 1 compares AFM and RHEED images of GaN and
      InN surfaces before and after exposure to the plasma discharge for 5 minutes at growth
      temperatures of 600 and 300 °C for the GaN and InN films, respectively. The GaN
      surface shows a negligible difference in morphology when exposed to the post-growth
      plasma discharge, whereas the InN surface exhibits significant texturing. It should be
      noted that exposure of the plasma to the GaN surface for even a few minutes resulted
      in a rising specular RHEED spot intensity associated with slight surface roughening, as
      seen in Figure 1. Longer post-growth plasma exposure (e.g., one hour) of GaN resulted
      in a significant surface roughening.

        Figure 1. AFM images of as-grown and post-growth plasma exposed GaN and InN films. The InN surface is degraded
                                                 by plasma exposure (inset: associated RHEED images.)

               InN film quality can be deteriorated due to a variety of thermal related factors
      such as high growth temperatures resulting in indium desorption and/or InN
      decomposition and low growth temperatures resulting in low adatom mobility. In order to
      isolate the effects of the plasma damage on the InN film quality, a temperature growth
      window, free of the mentioned thermal related effects, was first established. Figure 2
      illustrates the onset of each thermal related effect and their associated RHEED
      patterns. First, at low substrate temperatures (e.g., 225 °C), the indium adatom mobility
      is low, which results in the surface roughening and spotty RHEED patterns. Next, when
      the substrate temperature is set to greater than 250 °C (e.g., 300 °C) the film exhibits a
      1 x 1 RHEED streaky pattern and, thus, a smoother InN surface. Finally, at higher
      growth temperatures (e.g., 450 °C), the RHEED patterns dim due to the accumulation of
      excess indium metal on the surface, which scatters/blocks the electron beams as a
      result of InN decomposition.

                                                                5

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
        Figure 2. Substrate growth temperature window for MME InN for isolation and characterization of the plasma damage
         effects. The RHEED images indicate a rough surface for substrate temperatures that are low and InN decomposition

                                                            for substrate temperatures that are high.

               The onset of InN decomposition and indium desorption were analyzed to
      determine a more accurate temperature boundary and extract their corresponding
      activation energies. First, InN decomposition was studied by growing InN via MME with
      a growth temperature of 360 to 430 °C. When InN decomposes into indium and nitrogen
      species, the indium metal remains on the surface and contributes to the total metal dose
      as long as the growth temperature is lower than the temperatures at which indium
      desorbs from the surface. For a constant plasma condition and, thus, nitrogen flux, the
      excess indium introduced from the decomposition of the underlying InN film can be
      quantified by measuring the additional time required to consume the total metal dose
      when compared to lower growth temperatures less than 360 °C without indium
      decomposition. RHEED transients show that the InN decomposition rate increases by
      increasing the growth temperature, leading to a longer metal consumption times (see
      Figure 3). As seen in Figure 3, by increasing the substrate temperature, the duration of
      the highlighted region, associated with the decomposed In metal from the underlying
      InN layers, increases.

                                                                6

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
 Figure 3. MME RHEED intensity transients during the growth of InN at different substrate temperatures where InN
decomposition occurs. At higher growth temperatures, InN decomposition contributes additional indium metal to the

                                                                       surface.

The increased amount of time required to consume the indium metal on the

surface can be converted into an excess flux of indium in atoms/cm2. Figure 4 illustrates

the exponential nature of the decomposition flux vs substrate temperature. The

extracted InN decomposition activation energy is ~1.77 eV which is close to the

previously reported value of 1.78 eV.24
(a)                                      (b)

         Figure 4. InN decomposition flux in the form of excess In flux (atoms/cm2) present on the surface at various substrate
                                                  temperatures for both (a) linear and (b) Arrhenius plots.

               In addition to the InN decomposition, the substrate temperatures in which indium
      desorption occurs are identified. Unfortunately, it is difficult to directly measure the
      indium desorption from an InN surface by RHEED transients due to the InN
      decomposing at significantly lower substrate temperatures than those required for
      desorption, as depicted in Figure 2. Thus, at first, an indium dose of 5.1 x 1016
      atoms/cm2 is supplied to a GaN surface without any supplied nitrogen flux.
      Subsequently, most of the desorbed indium is indium desorption from the metallic
      indium surface, and not directly measuring desorption from the GaN surface. Indium
      desorbing from indium on a GaN surface should provide a rough estimate of the
      substrate temperature range where significant indium desorption occurs. Figure 5
      details RHEED intensity transients where the indium dose is evaporated onto the GaN

                                                                7

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
surface in the first 20 s and then desorbed. As seen, the RHEED intensity falls as the
indium accumulates on the surface and rises to its initial value once it is completely
desorbed. In addition, Figure 5 illustrates that the same amount of indium desorbs faster
at higher substrate temperatures.

Figure 5. RHEED intensity transients after evaporating 5.1 x 1016 atoms/cm2 indium onto a GaN surface for 20 s.
   RHEED transients illustrate the increasing rates of indium desorption with increasing substrate temperature.

The time to desorb the indium dose on the surface can be then plotted vs

substrate temperature (see Figure 6). As seen in Fig. 6, the desorption flux

exponentially increases with increasing substrate temperature. The Arrhenius plot

indicates an indium desorption activation energy of ~2.32 eV, which is most likely

indium desorbing from the metallic indium but does closely match with Gallinat et al.

reported value of 2.49 eV.24

(a)                           (b)

              Figure 6. (a) In desorption time and associated desorption flux and (b) Arrhenius plot of the desorption flux vs
                                                                        substrate temperature.

               By in-situ analysis of RHEED patterns and intensity transients, the substrate
      temperature boundaries for the onset of surface roughening due to low adatom mobility,
      InN decomposition, and In desorption are established. These temperature boundaries
      define a growth window for InN containing devices in the range of 250-400 °C. In this
      work, InN films grown in this window act as a sensitive material to isolate any potential
      influence of the plasma conditions on the crystal quality.

                                                                8

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
               The plasma can be electrically characterized in-situ via a flux ion gauge collector
      pin repurposed into a Langmuir probe. A Keithley 6517A electrometer was connected
      externally to the collector pin feedthrough. By placing the manipulator into the flux
      measurement position, the Langmuir probe is directed towards the plasma discharge.
      When sweeping voltage and measuring current, any ions/electrons collected are
      measured as a contribution to the total current.

               The plasma is then electrically characterized in-situ via the flux ion gauge
      collector pin repurposed into a Langmuir probe and placed in the growth position. By
      sweeping voltage and measuring current, any ion/electrons contribute to the total
      current. At a high reverse (forward) bias, most of the impinging negative electrons
      (positive ions) are repelled, and mainly the positive ions (electrons) are collected,
      resulting in a measured positive (negative) current. Since, in this setup, the Langmuir
      probe is outside the plasma bulb, and the density of the ions and electrons are often
      uneven, the probe may not collect an equal contribution of positive ions and negative
      electrons at zero applied bias. Instead, the plasma bulb will retain a net charge (+Q) that
      results from excess charge (­Q) ejected from the plasma towards the probe which
      establishes a steady state acceleration voltage (Va) according to Q = CVa (where C is
      the combined series capacitance of (a) the internal plasma and (b) the vacuum
      dielectric capacitance). The internal plasma capacitance depends mainly on the plasma
      chemistry modified by the plasma input conditions and bulb dimensions. The vacuum
      dielectric capacitance is mainly associated with the aperture to chamber (or sample)
      location. There corresponds to the series capacitances, a plasma potential (Vp), and a
      floating potential (Vf). The Langmuir probe bias that cancels the net charge expelled
      from the plasma and, thus, results in a zero measured current can be identified as Vf.
      Generally, Vp inside the plasma bulb (internal plasma) is found by the inflection point of
      the Langmuir probe I-V data in the positive potential region.25 The difference between
      Vp and Vf is defined as the ion acceleration potential (Va). Thus, a Langmuir probe can
      provide an understanding of the plasma contents, along with the induced ion
      acceleration potential between the plasma and the sample substrate.

                                                                9

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
(a)  (b)

        Figure 7. Semi-log and linear current-voltage characteristics of the Langmuir probe for different plasma conditions: (a)
           350 to 550 W RF applied power with a constant 2.5 sccm N2 flow and (b) 2.5 to 12.5 sccm N2 flow with a constant
          350 W RF applied power. The ion saturation current (Iis), electron saturation current (Ies), floating potential (Vf), and
                                                              plasma potential (Vp), are all labeled.

               The Langmuir probe's current-voltage characteristics of the plasma at various
      power and flow conditions are presented in Figure 7. The positive ion saturation current
      (Iis) and negative electron saturation current (Ies), the zero-current floating potential (Vf),
      and the plasma potential (Vp) are all labeled. It is evident that the plasma related
      parameters (including Ies, Iis, and Va) do not change with increasing plasma power, as
      the plasma density is proportional to the square root of power. Contrarily, as seen in
      Figure 7(b), an increased nitrogen gas flow results in an increased positive ion content,
      a reduced negative ion/electron content, and, thus, a more neutral plasma discharge
      which lowers the floating potential.

               In addition to the floating potential, the plasma potential must be found to
      determine the overall acceleration potential (Va = Vp - Vf). The plasma potential is best
      observed when the inflection point is easily identifiable in the current-voltage
      characteristic. Hershowitz details the best configuration for observing this inflection point
      when employing a sem(ai-)infinite planar probe insid(eb)the plasma.26 Unlike Hershowitz, in
      this paper, a circular flux gauge collector pin is utilized as a Langmuir probe outside the
      plasma, and, thus, the current-voltage inflection point and the plasma potential are
      difficult to extract, as reported by Azooz.27 However, some of the plasma potential
      values can be extracted by data smoothing and numerical differentiation of the I-V
      characteristics, as seen in Figure 8.

                                                               10

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
Figure 8. A numerical derivative of the Langmuir probe data for various (a) plasma powers and (b) nitrogen flows.

         The derivative data shown in Figure 8(a), which correspond to the various RF
powers and nitrogen flows, have identifiable peaks, associated with the plasma
potentials. The floating potential, extractable plasma potentials, and acceleration
potential (Vp-Vf) are plotted in Figure 9.

(a)  (b)

(c)  (d)

(e)  (f)

              Figure 9. Plasma parameters extracted from the Langmuir probe current-voltage characteristics: (a-b) floating
               potential, (c-d) plasma potentials, and (e-f) acceleration potentials for various RF powers and nitrogen flows.

               As seen in Figure 9, the magnitude of Vf is significantly reduced (by
      approximately 8 V) when increasing the nitrogen flow from 2.5 to 12.5 sccm, however, it
      negligibly changes by increasing the RF power from 350 to 550 W. In addition, the Vp
      increases by increasing the power and flow, which results in increased plasma density.
      The increase in the plasma density can be seen in Figure 10, as Vp linearly increases
      with the square root of the RF power.

                                                               11

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
Figure 10. Plasma potential vs the square root of the RF power and the associated linear fit.

The combined effects of Vp and Vf result in a rise of Va by ~1.4 V for an increase

in the power from 350 to 500 W and a fall of ~3.8 V for an increase in the nitrogen flow

from 2.5 to 10.0 sccm.

                        (a)  (b)

     Figure 11. Optical emission spectroscopy for different conditions: (a) 350 and 550 W RF applied power with a
    constant 2.5 sccm N2 flow, and (b) 2.5 and 12.5 sccm N2 flow with a constant 350 W RF applied power (inset: a

                         narrow wavelength range (740-750 nm) to view excited atomic nitrogen peaks).

         The excited molecular (N2*) and atomic nitrogen (N*) contents of the plasma are
extracted from the OES data. The broad and low intensity peaks, displayed in Figure
11(a) and Figure 11(b), are excited molecular nitrogen, while the sharp and narrow
peaks are associated with excited atomic nitrogen.16,21 The spectrum lines of 582 and
745 nm are chosen as representatives of N2* and N*, respectively. Figure 12 displays
atomic and molecular peak intensities vs plasma power and flow. Interestingly, the
atomic peak intensity monotonically increases with increasing power, as seen in Figure
12(a), but saturates at high flows (see Figure 12(b)). Additionally, the molecular peak
intensity has little correlation with increasing power (see Figure 12(c)), but
monotonically increases with the increasing flow (see Figure 12(d)). While the excited
atomic nitrogen peak intensity is much higher than the molecular nitrogen in Figure 11
and Figure 12, the integral width of the spectra is dominated by the molecular species
suggesting that the atomic nitrogen percentage of the plasma is relatively small.

                                                               12

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
(a)  (b)

(c)  (d)

               Figure 12. Peak OES intensity data for various plasma conditions at (a-b) atomic 745 nm emission and (c-d)
                                                                    molecular 582 nm emission.

               By comparing the OES and Langmuir probe data, one can conclude that by
      raising the plasma RF power, the significant rise in N* only results in a slight increase of
      positive ion content and Va. The negligible difference in Langmuir probe data would
      imply that the percentage of the total plasma density and the ion content of the plasma
      are minimally affected by the atomic nitrogen content and this is consistent with the
      growth rate data which will be presented later. As will be also shown later, even though
      the atomic nitrogen content does not dominate the plasma characteristics, it correlates
      to the defect concentration of the films and, likely, is the source of surface roughening,
      observed in Figure 1, and the unintentional background electron concentrations of InN
      films.

               Next, the effects of increasing the plasma nitrogen flow on the OES and
      Langmuir probe data are compared. The large increase in excited molecular nitrogen
      content from an increase in flow results in a larger positive ion content and reduced ion
      acceleration potential. At first, the increase in positive ion content with the increased
      flow may appear disconcerting. However, it is accompanied by a significant decrease in
      the acceleration potential responsible for the kinetic energy of ionized species that
      potentially causes degradation of the film quality. This is not surprising as the increased
      flow results in increased plasma bulb pressure and, thus, a decrease in the mean free
      path, described by Eq. (1), where the mean free path ( ) is calculated from the
      Boltzmann constant ( ), the temperature ( ), the pressure ( ), and the molecular
      diameter ( ). This equation dictates that the smaller atomic nitrogen will have a longer
      mean free path than molecular nitrogen, thus, traveling longer before being scattered,
      leading to higher kinetic velocities.

                                                               13

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
  ,  (1)

         The drop in the mean free path with higher flow results in increased scattering
within the plasma bulb, limiting the kinetic energy of species and consequently lowering
the floating potential of the remote plasma (over 8 V for an increase in flow from 2.5 to
10.0 sccm). The conductance of the aperture of the plasma bulb sets operational limits
over which the plasma can be sustained. For the aperture used in this study, the
pressure in the plasma bulb ranges from 1.5 to 7.4 mT and, consequently, a molecular
nitrogen mean free path of 31 to 6 mm for a flow rate of 2.5 to 12.5 sccm. The atomic
nitrogen mean free path for the same flow range, assuming independent gas species
(for comparison purposes only), varies from 1,400 to 270 mm. Below the lower pressure
limit, the plasma density is insufficiently high to support a plasma. At these lower flows,
the acceleration potential is substantial due to the longer mean free path and, thus,
higher obtainable scattering limited kinetic energies. At higher plasma pressures, the
plasma mean free path is insufficiently long to allow energy transfer, thus, extinguishing
the plasma. However, at the upper end of the allowable flow, the floating and
acceleration potentials are substantially lower resulting in (as will be shown below)
minor film damage. In a similar way, as the electrical conductance of the path from the
aperture of the plasma to the sample (chamber ground) is increased by increased flow,
the floating potential drops significantly due to the inability to support large voltages
across a highly conductive remote plasma glow.

         After optical and electrical characterization of the plasma, InN films are grown at
various plasma conditions. Seven ~1 µm-thick InN films were grown via MME on GaN
templates to determine the effect of plasma power and nitrogen flow on the material
quality. First, three films were grown with a nitrogen flow of 2.5 sccm and varied plasma
powers of 350, 450, and 550 W. Next, four additional films were grown with a standard
plasma power of 350 W and nitrogen flows of 3.75, 5.0, 6.25, and 7.5 sccm. The InN
films' surface morphology, X-ray diffraction, background electron concentrations, and
photoluminescence are compared to elucidate the origin of the plasma damage, and
predict optimal growth conditions. X-ray diffraction (not shown here) resulted in the
 0002 omega rocking curve full width at half maximum (FWHM) values between 137
and 167" for all films. In addition, the 1015 omega rocking curve FWHM values are
between 316 and 337" for all films. A 5 x 5 µm2 AFM image of the sample with the
highest growth rate (grown with 350 W RF plasma power, 7.5 sccm N2 flow and a
corresponding growth rate of ~4.6 µm/hr) is shown in Figure 13. The film shows a RMS
roughness of ~0.9 nm and a smooth spiral-hillock surface morphology, which is
observed for all the grown InN films. Notably, the MME growth method with high growth
rates yields high-quality InN films.

                                                               14

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
        Figure 13. A 5 x 5 µm2 AFM image of an InN film grown at 4.6 µm/hr exhibiting a 0.9 nm RMS roughness.

         Since both ion damage and background contamination can affect the
unintentional electron concentration, the films' growth rate and background electron
concentration are compared, as shown in Figure 14, for both power and flow rate
variations. The plasma condition of 350 W and 2.5 sccm nitrogen flow resulted in a
growth rate of 2.01 µm/hr and a background electron concentration of 1.36 x 1019 cm-3.
Growing an InN film with a plasma power of 550 W with 2.5 sccm nitrogen flow
increased the growth rate up to 2.54 µm/hr, and the background electron concentration
escalated to 1.49 x 1019 cm-3. Interestingly, when growing a film with a nitrogen flow as
high as 7.5 sccm, the resulting growth rate was 4.58 µm/hr, and the background
electron concentration reduced significantly to 3.54 x 1018 cm-3, unlike the trend for
increasing plasma power. As a) both the residual background electron concentration
and b) the change in electron concentration as a function of flow and, thus, growth rate
are higher than expected for contamination, it is likely that the residual electron
concentration is controlled predominantly by the ion damage. For example, when the
growth rate increases from 2.01 to 4.58 µm/hr (by a factor of 2.28), the residual electron
concentration drops from 1.36 x 1019 cm-3 to 3.54 x 1018 cm-3 (by a factor of 3.84). The
reduction in the unintentional electron concentration suggests that the defect density in
InN is controlled largely by the ion damage.

(a)  (b)

         Figure 14. Comparison of (a) growth rates and (b) background electron concentrations for InN films grown at various
                                                             nitrogen flow rates and plasma powers.

               The increase in background electron concentration with increasing power may be
      attributed to the increase in atomic nitrogen species, as evident in Figure 12(a), with a

                                                               15

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      negligible increase in the molecular content, as shown in Figure 12(c). The ion
      acceleration potential in Figure 9(e) is also slightly increased with increased power.
      Thus, it is speculated that a larger ratio of atomic nitrogen to molecular nitrogen as well
      as an increased acceleration potential can cause damage to the crystal which results in
      a higher background electron concentration, similar to previous work for GaN16.

               Photoluminescence (PL) spectra at low temperature (4 K) were taken for all
      seven InN films, as seen in Figure 15. The low temperature spectrums seem to be
      made up of two components: one invariant to changes in electron concentration and
      one dependent on electron concentration. The films' spectra show an emission at 0.77
      eV which is invariant to electron concentration, well above the fundamental bandgap
      energy of ~0.65-0.7 eV for InN.28­30 The 0.77 eV peak is also present in room
      temperature PL (not shown). While a future, more in-depth PL study is planned, it is
      presently speculated that the 0.77 eV emission is associated with the surface electron
      accumulation layer due to the commonly reported fermi-level pinning observed in InN.31
      At low temperatures, a second peak is also observed that varies with electron
      concentration. This peak is likely the band-to-band, or possibly the previously reported
      band-to-acceptor transition32,33 and can be seen varying from ~0.81 to 0.71 eV for
      electron concentrations varied from 1.49 x 1019 to 3.54 x 1018 cm-3. The ~100 meV shift
      from the highest to lowest electron concentration is likely due to the Moss-Burstein
      effect.34 The smallest electron concentration samples' PL peak location approaches the
      fundamental bandgap. Thus, plasma optimization is essential for InN films, as observed
      both electrically and optically.

             Figure 15. Photoluminescence spectra for ~1 µm thick InN films grown under various plasma conditions at 4 K.

               In order to minimize the plasma damage in high In content films, one must
      minimize the atomic nitrogen species per unit thickness (or growth rate) and minimize
      the ion acceleration potential. Ptak et al. demonstrated that the molecular nitrogen
      species are the species that control the growth rate and the atomic nitrogen species
      were speculated to generate point defects in the crystal.16 Thus, one should maximize
      the molecular to atomic nitrogen ratio and also minimize the ion acceleration potential in
      the plasma to minimize the plasma damage per unit thickness. Ptak et al. showed that

                                                               16

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      the size of the holes in the aperture plate could be used to adjust the atomic to
      molecular species but did not show the effect on the acceleration potential.

               By plotting the OES molecular to atomic peak intensity ratio, one can determine
      the plasma condition necessary to maximize the molecular to atomic content and, thus,
      minimize the plasma damage. Figure 16 illustrates that at high flow and low power, the
      maximum ratio of molecular to atomic nitrogen is achieved, in agreement with the
      experimental results. This condition also results in the lowest floating potential and
      consequently the lowest acceleration potential as evident in Figure 9(b). Thus,
      minimizing the plasma damage for III-nitride films is achievable at low RF power and
      high nitrogen flow, while still maintaining smooth morphology.

         Figure 16. OES molecular to atomic peak intensity ratio for various plasma nitrogen flow rates and applied RF power.

      IV. CONCLUSIONS
               Plasma-induced damage has been observed in III-nitride films and has been

      isolated from other effects such as roughening from low adatom mobility, InN
      decomposition, and indium desorption. By utilizing a flux gauge as a Langmuir probe in
      combination with OES, the RF plasma in the PAMBE reactor can be characterized. It is
      determined that atomic nitrogen and a plasma induced acceleration potential result in
      damage to InN films as observed via an elevated background electron concentrations. A
      low RF applied power and a high nitrogen flow enable a high molecular to atomic
      nitrogen ratio as well as a high growth rate and minimal acceleration potential which is
      the optimal plasma condition for continuous growth of high indium content III-nitrides,
      necessary for future III-nitride optoelectronics.
      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

               This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
      the Department of Energy under NSF CA EEC-1041895 and NSF SG DMR-1710032,
      and in part by the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy, U.S. Department of
      Energy, under Award DEAR0000470. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or
      recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not
      necessarily reflect those of the National Science Foundation or the Department of
      Energy.

                                                               17

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      References:

      1 J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, K.M. Yu, J.W. Ager, E.E. Haller, H. Lu, W.J. Schaff, Y. Saito,
      and Y. Nanishi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 80, 3967 (2002).

      2 J.F. Muth, J.H. Lee, I.K. Shmagin, R.M. Kolbas, H.C. Casey, B.P. Keller, U.K. Mishra,
      and S.P. DenBaars, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 2572 (1997).

      3 J. Wu, W. Walukiewicz, K.M. Yu, W. Shan, J.W. Ager, E.E. Haller, H. Lu, W.J. Schaff,
      W.K. Metzger, and S. Kurtz, J. Appl. Phys. 94, 6477 (2003).

      4 J.J. Williams, H. McFavilen, A.M. Fischer, D. Ding, S. Young, E. Vadiee, F.A. Ponce,
      C. Arena, C.B. Honsberg, and S.M. Goodnick, IEEE J. Photovoltaics 7, 1646 (2017).

      5 J.J. Williams, H. McFavilen, A.M. Fischer, D. Ding, S.R. Young, E. Vadiee, F.A. Ponce,
      C. Arena, C.B. Honsberg, and S.M. Goodnick, 2017 IEEE 44th Photovolt. Spec. Conf.
      PVSC 2017 193 (2018).

      6 E. Vadiee, E.A. Clinton, H. Mcfavilen, A.S. Weidenbach, Z. Engel, C. Matthews, C.
      Zhang, C. Arena, R.R. King, C.B. Honsberg, and W.A. Doolittle, Appl. Phys. Express
      11, 082304 (2018).

      7 C.A.M. Fabien, M. Moseley, B. Gunning, W.A. Doolittle, A.M. Fischer, Y.O. Wei, and
      F.A. Ponce, IEEE J. Photovoltaics 4, 601 (2014).

      8 C.A.M. Fabien, A. Maros, C.B. Honsberg, and W.A. Doolittle, IEEE J. Photovoltaics 6,
      460 (2016).

      9 C.A.M. Fabien and W.A. Doolittle, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 130, 354 (2014).

      10 N.G. Young, E.E. Perl, R.M. Farrell, M. Iza, S. Keller, J.E. Bowers, S. Nakamura, S.P.
      Denbaars, and J.S. Speck, Appl. Phys. Lett. 104, 163902 (2014).

      11 M. Kamp, M. Mayer, A. Pelzmann, and K.J. Ebeling, MRS Internet J. Nitride
      Semicond. Res. 2, (1997).

      12 M. Moseley, B. Gunning, J. Lowder, W. Alan Doolittle, and G. Namkoong, J. Vac. Sci.
      Technol. B 31, 03C104 (2013).

      13 C.A.M. Fabien, B.P. Gunning, W. Alan Doolittle, A.M. Fischer, Y.O. Wei, H. Xie, and
      F.A. Ponce, J. Cryst. Growth 425, 115 (2015).

      14 M. Moseley, J. Lowder, D. Billingsley, and W.A. Doolittle, Appl. Phys. Lett. 97, 191902
      (2010).

      15 E.A. Clinton, E. Vadiee, C.A.M. Fabien, M.W. Moseley, B.P. Gunning, W.A. Doolittle,
      A.M. Fischer, Y.O. Wei, H. Xie, and F.A. Ponce, Solid. State. Electron. 136, 3 (2017).

      16 A.J. Ptak, M.R. Millecchia, T.H. Myers, K.S. Ziemer, and C.D. Stinespring, Appl.
      Phys. Lett. 74, 3836 (1999).

      17 B.P. Gunning, E.A. Clinton, J.J. Merola, W.A. Doolittle, and R.C. Bresnahan, J. Appl.
      Phys. 118, 155302 (2015).

                                                               18

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
      18 H.M. Mott-Smith and I. Langmuir, Phys. Rev. 28, 727 (1926).
      19 M.B. Hopkins and W.G. Graham, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 57, 2210 (1986).
      20 A. V. Blant, O.H. Hughes, T.S. Cheng, S. V. Novikov, and C.T. Foxon, Plasma
      Sources Sci. Technol. 9, 12 (2000).
      21 E. Iliopoulos, A. Adikimenakis, E. Dimakis, K. Tsagaraki, G. Konstantinidis, and A.
      Georgakilas, J. Cryst. Growth 278, 426 (2005).
      22 S. Porowski and I. Grzegory, J. Cryst. Growth 178, 174 (1997).
      23 M. Moseley, D. Billingsley, W. Henderson, E. Trybus, and W.A. Doolittle, J. Appl.
      Phys. 106, (2009).
      24 C.S. Gallinat, G. Koblmüller, J.S. Brown, and J.S. Speck, J. Appl. Phys. 102, 064907
      (2007).
      25 R.L. Merlino, Am. J. Phys. 75, 1078 (2007).
      26 N. Hershkowitz, How Langmuir Probes Work (Academic Press, Inc., 1989).
      27 A.A. Azooz, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 79, 103501 (2008).
      28 A.A. Klochikhin, V.Y. Davydov, V. V. Emtsev, A. V. Sakharov, V.A. Kapitonov, B.A.
      Andreev, H. Lu, and W.J. Schaff, 71, 195207 (2005).
      29 T. Matsuoka, H. Okamoto, M. Nakao, H. Harima, and E. Kurimoto, 81, 1246 (2003).
      30 V.Y. Davydov, A.A. Klochikhin, V. V Emtsev, D.A. Kurdyukov, S. V Ivanov, V.A.
      Vekshin, F. Bechstedt, J. Furthmuller, J. Aderhold, J. Graul, A. V Mudryi, H. Harima, A.
      Hashimoto, A. Yamamoto, and E.E. Haller, 234, 787 (2002).
      31 I. Mahboob, T.D. Veal, C.F. Mcconville, H. Lu, and W.J. Schaff, Phys. Rev. Lett. 92,
      036804 (2004).
      32 B. Arnaudov, T. Paskova, P.P. Paskov, B. Magnusson, E. Valcheva, B. Monemar, H.
      Lu, W.J. Schaff, H. Amano, and I. Akasaki, Phys. Rev. B 69, 115216 (2004).
      33 M. Feneberg, J. Däubler, K. Thonke, R. Sauer, P. Schley, and R. Goldhahn, Phys.
      Rev. B 77, 245207 (2008).
      34 T.S. Moss, Proc. Phys. Soc. Sect. B 67, 775 (1954).

                                                               19

Pursuant to the DOE Public Access Plan, this document represents the authors' peer-reviewed, accepted manuscript.
                            The published version of the article is available from the relevant publisher.
